I have to do all the time.
To enjoy the exhibit, it will continue on display through this Saturday and you can check the
helix center website for details.
I would like to introduce our participants in tonight's round table creative turbulence.
To my right is Dennis Pelly, professor of psychology and neuro science at New York University.
His right is Enrico Fonda, postdoctoral researcher at the NYU Tandon School of Engineering.
Next is Dana Carwis, artist and lecturer, integrated digital media, department of technology
culture and society at the NYU Tandon School of Engineering.
Next is Luc Dubois, composer, artist and performer, co-director of integrated digital media and
director of the Brooklyn Experimental Media Center, both of the NYU Tandon School of Engineering.
And joining us shortly is Caterpellis Reneavassen, professor of department of physics at the
Caront Institute and the Eugene Kleiner Professor of Innovation, department of mechanical
and aerospace engineering, and dean of the Tandon School of Engineering and University
professor all at NYU.
So with that, ladies and gentlemen, buckle your seat belts, we're about to encounter
turbulence.
Perhaps Enrico, you can start by telling us a little bit about how this came about.
Yeah, so I started when I was doing research at the University of Maryland in the down
lake lab group and I was doing research on quantum vortices, which are quantum tornadoes
that live inside super fluid helium, which is a liquid helium at very low temperature,
which is macroscopic quantum order.
And so these videos were really kind of interesting and we had the publication about it and some
press release that was really interested by the public.
They were asking strange questions even about it and seemed that it really inspired the
fantasy of people about the project.
So we thought it might be interesting also to see in a light that it's different compared
to the scientific area and so might include it in some artistic setting.
So with that idea, then we decided to incorporate also some artists to collaborate with scientists
to get together a show.
And so we get together with Luke, Dana, Professor Jivalda, and to set up this show.
And so you can see some of these artwork before the quantum vortices you've probably already
seen are those the research that have been done before.
And then there are some other ones like work by Dana.
Maybe you can tell us.
Sure.
So can everyone hear me okay?
Great.
So the piece I have out here is the one in the corner called immutable swell.
And it was something that I was kind of thinking about for a while, but ended up putting together
last summer when I was near the ocean.
So the piece was born out of both my fear of the ocean and my love of it.
And I'd always look at the ocean at night and try to understand what was happening and
why it was maybe more fearful at night to look at it than during the day or even swimming
in it.
And I started looking at different models of ocean waves just to try to look at the data
and understand it in a new way.
Kind of in the same way that maybe in other projects I would look at maybe a thunderstorm
through Doppler radar or through false image coloring.
You see the red area and there's a ton of rain or you see kind of like a green area and
it's maybe not as scary.
But then if you look at the thunderstorm itself outside, you can really feel it.
You can see kind of like the synoptic meteorologists looking at the sky before numerical modeling
came around.
There was kind of a direct observation of knowing that something was coming.
And I kind of took this departure from the normal scientific inscription that is very
trusted.
So I'm looking at Enrico because he is the scientist here among us.
And I think that, and you, yes, and Dennis.
So just thinking about kind of this, going into this project, kind of thinking about new
ways of kind of experiencing scientific data by still using it and using collection methods
that were somewhat scientific.
So for this particular piece, I took my phone and it has an accelerometer and pressure
data and location data and I wrapped it up in multiple levels of waterproofing attached
it to a fishing pole at first and cast it out into the sea, in Turro, Massachusetts.
And watched it.
I actually swam out a few times and then with the fishing pole and cast it during the clips
for the summer because no one was in the water and I didn't want to disturb anyone.
So I was by myself way out there.
And I floated with the phone back and the fishing pole.
Just trying to kind of, and I was scared.
It was deep.
I couldn't.
I'm very terrified of the water.
And I ended up letting the phone go back and forth as a sensor to shore.
And then this happened multiple times.
And I took that data and it was recorded at 100 hertz.
So there was dimensional data of me with the phone at first and then the fishing pole
in the phone in the water.
So I was able to collect over 500,000 data points of waves coming in to the shore and
breaking on the shore.
So then I took that data and brought it through Python and kind of traditional ways of visualizing
it and started to play with the form.
So what is the dimensional form of this?
How can I get this invisible kind of direct experience of floating in the wave exported
into some type of dimensional observation that someone could look at and emotionally
feel that that's what it feels like to be floating in the ocean?
Because all these wave models I was looking at, they were missing this dimension of emotional
connection to the thing itself.
Like when I look at a model of a scientific wave, and there's very beautiful models and
they can show you hundreds of different things and hundreds and hundreds and thousands of
different ways.
I didn't quite ever say like, oh, that's what it feels like to be in a wave.
So I wanted to play with that.
So I took all those data points and put them in a dimensional model and just extruded them
into, it was just a cube that I kept twisting and twisting and twisting.
But you can start to see the shape of the wave as it was hitting my body or as it was
hitting the sensor itself.
So I had it as a very complex model, which is what the image is.
And then I took the challenge of printing that with a machine back into a form, which
is what you're seeing in the hallway.
So he should come join.
So really it's a question of scientific.
How do we get beyond traditional scientific vernacular and inscription that is very trusted
and often looked at by a professional and it becomes, it can translate into the public
or into the research and people trust that data, scientific data and how to use other
kind of visualization tools.
Kind of in the spirit of Edward Tufti, but breaking that even further and trying to get
to a new way of looking at something or a new way of feeling something that is a phenomenon
that we all experience.
And it's a break of these scientists looking at this phenomenon separate from the thing
itself.
And I know that's not possible at certain scales.
So if you're looking at something in a macro-scaler, micro-scaler, if you're looking at the Mars
rover, there's no way that the person observing that is ever going to be able to see that
data with their naked eye.
So I'm very curious about coming up with new ways to look at it in an unmediated, almost
caveman way of looking at something or feeling something.
Has anyone looking at it said that they could feel the wave?
Yes.
Once I told them it was a wave, they could understand it as a wave.
It's a beautifully romantic kind of, my favorite art science overlaps always have this thing
that's very human to them.
So I love the whole, you throw your phone in the water when you have a terrible breakup.
That's like the throwing the phone in the water.
And it's the same thing with Raphael's piece and the idea that it's an utterance.
It's just a very human natural thing and we're somehow leveraging what we understand about
physics to show it to you.
And I don't know, I think that's really cool.
That's a really good way to bring it home.
Yeah.
Regarding visualization of data, also the work by collective motion by David McLeo, the professor
at NYU showing this collective motion of particles that are interacting with each other and
create this fluid-like form that was in the theme of the whole project, was fluids.
And also that was visualization of data but interpreted to the eye of the artist.
In the beginning, in fact, I was overlooking the interaction.
In the beginning, there were a lot of back and forths of data between the artists and
the scientists because the artist said the data of the scientist wasn't good, wasn't
looking good for some reason.
And so it's something to be considered what is looking good or not.
Eventually, they found something that was meaningful both scientifically and aesthetically,
according to the eyes of the artist.
And those decisions become completely subjective.
So there's this moment where there's a kind of a testing process, I think, that the artists
go through with whatever data they're working with, especially if they're working with scientific
data or any data set or any phenomena, that there's a moment where it shifts to maybe
how they're looking at it.
And potentially, this credits it in a scientific realm but offers something else that maybe
the scientists won't be able to reach.
So that's a really interesting space to work in when the data or the phenomena we're looking
at when it's transitioning into this kind of subjective space of the interpreter or the
new inscriber.
It's also speaking to sort of like the shared aesthetic qualities and experience that there
resonates between the artist and the scientist, that they're experiencing something on a similar
level.
It's kind of like the, I guess from the 19, even before this, in history, I don't think
that's the exact date, but when the naturalists would go out and look at new land or they'd
find new species and they would take notes on, so these scientists would be taking notes
on what they saw and they would go back and they would hire an artist that could draw
it better than they could.
So you get these beautiful atlases with species from the beginning of time that we're unable
to be photographed because that didn't exist yet, but this dialogue that the scientist
had to have with the artist to tell them, okay, that you need to draw it like this.
Because if the scientist drew it, it might have just looked like a cartoon.
So there's a kind of a communication that has existed for a while between artists and
scientists trying to realize or visually interpret the phenomena.
Back in the days, you were also Leonardo was doing both and before the science was born.
Right, but Leonardo would consider painting an art.
I mean, sorry, a painting of science because he, because of the instrumentation needed to
be used in the painting.
So he would, Leonardo's time, he considered painting of science.
Also because the painter had a divine mind, he could see things the way God could.
So there was an ultimate truth in what Leonardo was after.
His professor is Serena Boston.
Hi.
Apologies for being great.
Oh, that's okay.
We're glad you're here.
I know we want to know if we have the slides.
When everybody else is spoken, I'll take it.
Did you have some slides that you wanted to present?
I had four of them.
Are I still half of them?
Go to Ariel.
Sure.
Yeah, go for it.
I wanted to say that first of all, thank you for having us here.
Thank you.
It's new to me.
Yes.
Thank you.
My ears are not the right size.
Also when you think about science and art, I know that these are quite often deemed as
two different sorts of activities.
And in fact, there are very immense differences.
But on the other hand, if you go a little bit deeper, all my friends tell me that the
sense of beauty and also its ability to evoke emotions are sort of very similar.
I wanted to illustrate to you one or two things.
Here is the most beautiful week question in mathematics.
Now, why would you say it is most beautiful?
It's not apparent to people who are not trained in mathematics.
So what it does is it's now, of course, since 1748.
It combines five very important quantities since this nice way.
Zero, as you know, is just a quantity to which if you add anything, the quantity to remain
the same.
And that's the so-called additive invariant.
And one is something you multiply anything with, it will still give you the same thing.
And pi, as you know, is the ratio of the circumference of the circle to its diameter.
And it has been computed to 20 quadrillionth place.
That is not million, billion, trillion, quadrillion, 20 times.
And it still has no pattern and it keeps going.
There is no end to it.
I, as you would all recognize, is a square root of minus one, which is a strange quantity.
And E is so-called Euler number, which also has been computed to 500 billion places and
it still continues ad nauseam.
But somehow when you combine like this, all of that is somehow gone.
All this complexity that you see individually is totally gone.
And you have this extraordinarily simple formula due to Euler.
And it is like E equals MC squared or some very similar thing that people know.
So of course, you will have to learn a little bit about how to appreciate this.
And that's part of what I think is in appreciation of art, literature, anything like that.
And the other one, next one, you all recognize this, this is the wave.
Can you go to the next one?
This is the great wave of Kanagawa in Japan.
When Japan was for 250 years, sort of removed from the rest of the world, it basically developed
its own skills in art, in all kinds of other human endeavors.
And you can see the wave, the huge wave, which is now known as the rogue wave in the literature,
keyboards now capsized and there is the Mount Fuji at the very back with the snow cap on
it.
And there are all kinds of scientific emotions that this will produce for us if I could go
on at it, but I will not do that.
And the third one, which again, all of you remember, this lovely little part of the bigger
poem, the woods are lovely, dark and deep, but I have promises to keep.
So he's working that he has responsibilities that he can't take himself off from going
into the woods and enjoying them and miles to go before I sleep and miles to go before
I sleep.
I can't omit the fact that the last line has been repeated twice and repeated and so it
is really extraordinary set of emotions that this will bring to bear on whoever reads it.
And the last one is the topic of the conversation today about turbulence and its beauty and
what it has for art.
It's just a jet that is coming down.
You can see tendrils and vertices and all of them somehow combined in some very complex
way.
There is an admixture of order on the one hand and chaos on the other.
To me that evokes again extraordinary sense of beauty and extraordinary set of complex
ideas.
And to me, therefore, these illustrate somehow the kinds of things which I will not spell
out for you.
I think that science has in all its major endeavors.
It's utilitarian and therefore people sort of don't understand that beyond the utilitarian
aspect of science there's all kinds of beauty in it and that's what really gives rise to
a satisfaction of doing something worthwhile and if truth and beauty can never be equated
to each other, well, maybe there is something to it.
That's all I wanted to say.
Well perhaps this speaks to your interest in the psychophysics of beauty.
Okay, so I'll just say a couple words about myself.
I wanted to join this discussion.
So I'm a psychophysicist.
I study perception by behavior and most of my work is on object recognition, how we recognize
things, how we read, but a new line of my research is trying to understand the experience
of beauty.
So in thinking about what we would talk about tonight, I thought there was a danger that
we might all agree.
So I tried to pick something that we might disagree about.
So I'm going to take a position that perhaps others will want to differ from.
We're teasing too.
Well, that's what we'll argue about.
So the theme tonight is this magic show that Indrico organized about combining art and
science.
And I suspect we all more or less agree about what science is, making up a definition, I
would say something about an attempt to reach a mathematical understanding of something
that's subject to test by prediction and experiment.
You might disagree about that.
But it seems more likely that we're going to disagree about what art is.
And so I looked up what Wikipedia gives as definition of art.
And I hadn't quite expected it, but it gives it conditional on the year.
So let me just read it to his only couple sentences.
Art is a diverse range of human activities in creating visual, auditory, or performing
artifacts, artworks, expressing the author's imaginative or technical skill intended to
be appreciated for their beauty or emotional power.
Okay, that seems reasonable.
And then it goes on to say until the 17th century, art referred to any skill or mastery
and was not differentiated from crafts or science.
So Dana brought up Da Vinci earlier, and you were suggesting with that division, according
to Wikipedia, I think he wouldn't have made any distinction.
His paintings and his engineering are all art.
So art here in the sense of artifact made by man.
Right, but he would also say it's science.
He would Leonardo thought that painting and his era was science because of the instrumentation
and also that's like...
So those two words would distinguish his activities, right?
Yes.
And that's like legacy now when we feel like liberal arts.
So my sense is that the spirit of this show is actually a 17th century perspective of
treating art and science as not having any division and that they are demonstrating a
mastery to share an appreciation of the topic.
So one of the things that if we're going to try and parse would be actually whether the
artist had the intent of producing objects that had the purpose of being appreciated
for beauty and emotional power.
Okay, that's my position.
I'm hoping someone would disagree.
I would argue, I mean, being a person that created an artwork for the show that...
Right, perfect.
I mean, I really struggled.
Is this an artwork or is it just a really fancy visualization of some type of phenomena?
And for me, I'm not sure if it's art in my mind.
I know it's an object I made.
I'm coming also from an architecture background and it fits in a sculptural format and it was
printed on really beautiful paper and it's this inkjet print.
But I really struggle as someone creating and playing with this data as an experiment
as I'm going through it in the process of just getting from the data set to what you
see out there.
I'm a former body surfer and so I could resonate to your comments about how attractive and
frightening the ocean is and how you had the frustration in looking at a lot of other visualization
work about waves that failed to convey any of that emotional energy and that you were...
That missing bit was part of your motivation doing your piece.
Trying to seek.
I was seeking some way to view it, I guess, for myself, which would be kind of...
I think that would tip me over into the realm of an artist in the process and also have
served no purpose or consequence except for other people to look at it or myself to look
at it and be like, okay, that looks like a really pressurized experience of what I'm
trying to share while floating.
Anyone else?
So the question, would you distinguish just the pure visualization of the vortices?
No, when you made your piece, I think you collaborated in several of them.
Yes, some of them were collaboration with artists.
Were you trying to produce something that would produce an experience of beauty in the observer
or some other strong emotion or did you have a different purpose?
So I was collaborating on the scientific part, so I was not actually having the goal of producing
something was in the mind of the artist, that particular task, to deal with that.
But there was our research about a concept behind, for example, the work by Rafael
Lusano-Hamer.
He was this concept of the words staying in the atmosphere forever.
He tried to conceptualize that into a form of art and an object.
And he actually tried to different kinds of pieces of art, but some of them didn't work
out well like he wanted.
And so eventually just one piece was eventually finalized, like the one that was here, the
3D printed of the flow there of someone speaking.
So in this case, there was a concept that wanted to be expressed.
And I think also some form of beauty, but you have to ask the artist because I cannot
speak for him.
Okay, so I'm going to push to...
So I saw the piece and I'm very interested in the concept of how it was made, and I was
interested in seeing the form.
But I wanted to ask, can we do a show of hands in the studio?
Please.
And so how many people were moved by the 3D visualization of the speech, the pressure
pattern produced by the speech?
Okay, and how many were not moved?
So the sense of a strong, powerful emotion that overcomes you.
You should re-ask the question, having defined it.
Sorry.
You should re-ask the question, ask it again.
No, we've defined it.
Okay, so shall we vote again?
So how many people were moved by the visualization of the speech pattern?
And how many people were not moved?
About 50-50.
So that means a lot of people here were moved.
So that's a successful piece.
Can I say this?
Please.
I don't remember the precise words that Keats used at one time, but I think he said something
like this.
If you begin to get into the nitty-gritty of things, you will sort of detract from its
beauty.
That is to say, you go to the ocean, you admire these beautiful waves, but once you begin
asking, well, at what speed are they going, or at what angle are they propagating, and
what kind of drop patterns it produces and so on.
Keats thought that it diminishes the beauty of the whole thing.
On the other hand, there is another view which says, why?
Why would it do that?
The object that you saw before is still exactly as formidable as it was before in some ways.
But now, having asked these questions, you have a deeper insight into the phenomena that
you admired before.
Will the knowledge somehow diminish the beauty of the object?
Now that's something that many people think is what happens.
What is to say, you see this sunset, it's so beautiful, but once you begin to ask, well,
what's the spectrum of the sunset, you know what angle is the sunsetting, etc.
It somehow seems to become mundane, but I don't see that that's how it should be treated
at all.
So in fact, there is a speech pattern which you might abstractly admire, but once you
somehow make a pattern out of it, you begin to say, is this what it is, and then you somehow
lose interest or lose your ability to relate to the mystery that you had before?
And to me, that somehow looks even though I was not terribly impressed and I raised my
hand for the second category, I think the fact that you somehow make it more concrete,
make it more understandable, make it more more expressible in terms of quantitative things,
does not diminish the beauty of anything as I know.
That's my personal prejudice.
My sense is depends on the teacher.
So many of the works here were produced by physicists and I am reasonably sure that they
love physics and that the more they study physics, physics doesn't become less interesting
or less attractive by the process of study.
But there are some teachers who kill topics.
In fact, what I was told as a graduate student was the purpose of you writing a paper is
not to kill the field and that is to say, not say the last word on it, but actually
to enhance the interest of others so it could be carried on further.
So I think you are absolutely right.
Some teachers can kill the interest, somehow present it as a finished product and then
you have no interest in it anymore.
I think that comes back to maybe what I was saying a little earlier about this kind of
knowledge formation around the topic, going to the teacher or even the beauty found in
the data, the quantitative data.
And there's, I think the artists and I think what Raphael and some of these other artists
are trying to do is essentially calibrate that quantitative information towards beauty
again.
So it starts as a phenomena, it gets removed from the phenomena into the numbers, numbers
and then there's these kind of calibration techniques that are really specific to the
artists and those experiments and calibration of resurrecting the beauty back out of the
data to be experienced isn't going to kill the looking at a sunset.
Even if you take a photograph of a sunset, that can never explain what you're actually
seeing any photograph or any painting compared to what you're seeing and with your naked
eye.
And for me it goes back to this kind of human or naked eye observation of being able to
look at a phenomena.
There is the, you made a point that somehow there is an abstraction of something that
is a workative and that's what the artists seem to work on.
The point is that that's the kind of freedom that a scientist probably does not have in
some sense.
So you might say therefore they are somewhat different that is to say the abstractions
should still in science satisfy certain rules which we think are all right.
Now this constraint somehow is the heart of the matter of the distinction between these
two activities.
Now I'm not sure that if you train yourself a little bit that this requirement or the
constraint that you have certain loss that you have to obey in how you abstract things
and how you describe them and all that.
I'm not sure that it should diminish the beauty of the enterprise.
That's my own thinking on this.
But I know a lot of people think that the fact that you are constrained somehow, the
fact that you do not, you cannot write down any arbitrary equation or something like that,
we will somehow kill the originality, creativity, beauty, etc.
On the other hand the fact that you can describe something in nature in some quantitative ways
is such an extraordinary phenomenon.
We have no right to doing any of those things.
I mean we are humans, we somehow we seem to comprehend everything that goes beyond us,
the universe.
How can we, tiny specks of dust in the universe, can comprehend something so universal, so
large and so inspiring.
So to me it actually enhances and adds beauty to the whole thing rather than diminish it.
I can say how beautiful is this but then you want to really go a little bit deeper, a little
understand a little bit more.
Why does it diminish anything?
Why does it diminish the sunset?
I mean that's one position let's say, one I take just because you said one of us should
agree.
I can bring up an example of maybe a funny example that everyone can relate to.
So when in 1972 we had the- Were you born at that time?
Not yet, I was making it some way.
So we're all familiar with the view of Earth from space, Blue Marble.
That was a photograph that was taken by astronauts on Apollo 17, no, 11.
So I'm not following that.
Yes, sorry about fact, but anyway the point is that this single image of Earth was taken
by a camera, set back down and the intent of the image wasn't by the astronauts to just
take this grand image of the Earth that we knew it at that time and still know it.
It wasn't part of the mission plan.
So they took this photograph.
It came back down and NASA flipped it.
So I guess when it originally arrived on the film it was taken with the South Pole, basically
not.
So they flipped it and then they color corrected it a little bit and then that got put out
into the world.
And that had an effect on the astronauts who saw it and other people who have been in space,
the overview effect, some emotional kind of shift that happens by looking at something
from afar.
But it can also happen to people who just see the photograph.
So that's kind of one example of a phenomenon.
Maybe there's like an emotional addition to this.
We don't have access to that phenomenon with our own eyes.
It comes through a camera.
So that's one example where it's like a surprise that happens with the technology and the science
and the instruments that allowed us to take this image.
And people by just seeing this had emotional surprising reaction.
It was maybe mirroring what the astronauts were feeling or if they've learned about this
feeling, that there's no borders.
There's this kind of Earth, not from space, but Earth in space and how that image could
have an impact.
So I think that's like one example.
And I was stunningly beautiful, yes, I agree.
And the way it was, the trip it was doing on your mind was part of it, yes.
Yeah.
So I do think that there is potential to have these dramatic emotional experiences through
just one image.
We're showing people something that they thought they knew in a strange way.
It doesn't look like the toy worlds we grew up with.
And we thought we knew the planet and then we realized that all the political lines are
missing.
We didn't know the planet.
Yeah, that's a question of scale.
And that's the same thing with a lot of these things.
It's like, you can say, you think you know the ocean, but I'm going to show you a different
way that I know the ocean or the web or that I've instrumented the ocean or that I've experienced
the ocean.
I think I know how speech works, but I don't actually know how speech works at all.
Like this whole like, which way do you come in on a problem?
I don't know.
I always think it's really interesting trying to figure out these categories.
I was trained as a musician.
So John Cage has this kind of canny riff that just music is just organized sound.
But another way of saying it is the complete opposite of it has nothing to do with sound.
Music is emotionally manipulating people with physics algorithms and data.
It has nothing to do with anything with your ears.
So like at the micro level instruments or physics, you know, there's things that weren't
running on physics, then we like sort of add keys and chords and scales as our algorithms.
Then at the macro level, you have a whole piece as an information stream.
So you can make music in a million different ways that have nothing to do with your ears
if you can just sort of change the terms of the definition.
And that's what I think is always exciting about this work.
That's when Rico and I first met, I really enjoyed hearing him riff about the physics
research you work on because you were talking to me about how it sounds.
Do you remember this?
You're talking about the spiracles and they make cracking noises.
Oh, yeah.
Yeah, and you were showing me this video.
And I was like, oh, that's amazing.
There's like this little like Janus is an achus piece in every stream of helium.
And like if you could just get that out of there, we could like make some kind of crazy,
you know, I don't know, thing that they could really evoke it.
I don't know.
And maybe I could remark on your comment on music.
Music is, you said is organized sound.
In some way, it's not the organization at all that matters, which also you said.
But I want to say it in a different way.
It's how different parts of music relate to the other parts.
How an part really relates to the integral whole.
That's what really is important in science to it is not the individual facts that are
important.
It's how they relate to each other.
And that's without really relating to each other.
It's really just an isolated fact.
And that's not of any consequence in terms of, in terms we are discussing.
So one definition of beauty would be how each, this is Heisenberg who said this.
How one part relates to the next part and to the whole.
And that's really what music is, why it is special.
After all the notes are not that complicated.
And I value if you listen to Mozart, it's a very different type of thing.
Well conversation seems to have been more laminar than turbulence.
So I'm wondering if maybe we could transition to talking a bit more about the turbulence
that these projects also.
You say something and decline laminar.
Okay.
Well we can start from the world actually also related to the project that was.
That we are working on right now.
We are looking at it right now.
And it's about the confusion and creation about turbulence.
So the turbulence comes from the Latin verb, verb, turbo, which means to agitate, throw
into confusion.
And we use for the first time by, first time by federal in his lupus and agnus, fable to
describe the water stirred up by the lamb that's equinated, polluted the water by,
out to the wolf.
But then was used by Lnerald Ravinche to describe the turbulence actually of water.
And was said, the turbulence was the word describing it.
And he actually was one of the first one really getting some big insights about the turbulence.
And again, turbulence something that's chaotic, random, and it's the motion of fluid.
And he compared the motion of the fluid to the motion of hair.
And he painted all these nice vortices and described a cascade of vortices, it goes from
the large scale to the small scale.
And so he had the profound insight also just by observing it.
And he also put some very important questions regarding the nature of turbulence, the creation
of turbulence, how it maintains and how it decays that are still open.
You want to?
Yeah.
You will remember this question.
Who will read this turbulent priest?
Oh, remember this, who will read me of this turbulent priest?
Yeah, who was this guy?
That's the first use of the work turbulent, as well.
You remember this in the cathedral.
Is it?
It's referring to Thomas Moore.
Yeah.
Now it's before Thomas Moore, it's his Henry, it's King Henry.
Yeah, he's something, something number.
Yeah.
This is a priest that he got, he really killed and Peter or two actually played the role
of Henry.
And then what's this other guy who was, at least Taylor's husband twice, I forget his
name.
Yeah, Richard Burton.
Richard Burton?
Yeah, yeah, he played the role of the priest.
So who will read this?
Thomas Beckett.
Oh, sorry.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, same idea.
Yeah, yeah, that's the priest who get whacked because they talk up to the kings, right?
So that's the, yeah.
So for us, white turbulence is really important is this as I see it.
Physics has generally, for a very long time, taken one object at a time like, for example,
an atom or an electron in controlled circumstances and has studied its properties.
And you can measure, let's say, the charge on the electron to, I don't know, 10 days,
no place, whatever number that is.
But it, so that's how physics has really gone for many, many years.
But it turns out that when you cannot isolate objects, but the objects begin to interact
with each other, then it becomes extremely complicated.
And this is how chaos came into being, for instance, when, let's say, three objects interact
with each other, you can no longer predict how their evolution takes place in long term.
So, turbulence, the essence of the phenomenon is really interaction.
Interaction among its constituent matter, which could be vortices, like Enrico said,
it could be whatever else.
So in reality, most of what we observe around us is really interaction among many components.
Humans interact with each other, government interacts with the citizens in some way, businesses
interact, financial markets are interacting.
They're all the results of some interactions.
So the real question is, when these things interact in some complicated way like that,
is there some fundamental truth behind these interactions?
If I, it may be statistical in nature or somehow or the other, that will transcend the real
specific details of the phenomena you're looking at.
Would the finance markets have some properties that transcend the details of the financial
market and would relate to what, let's say, a flow of turbulent motion of fluid as.
So, that's the question.
So the ultimate question for many of us who work in this field is really to discover within
quotation marks, if there are such rules that transcend the specific details of the constituents
that interact with each other.
And if it is, if that is the case, that would be spectacular.
I don't know that that is the case.
Each time we think we have some understanding of this universal aspects of it, we take one
step back and we just find that that's not exactly right.
And so it may well be true that there are at some level, they are probably similar.
If you take the power spectrum of the financial, let's say the signal on the, and from the
Wall Street stock market, it may have some resemblance to turbulence as a matter of fact.
There have been a lot of people who have studied this.
But you go deeper, one step deeper, this mirage of universality somehow disappears.
If it doesn't disappear exactly, but it will say that they are not really exactly the same.
You go one step deeper, you sort of figure out that really they are even more different.
So it's like peeling onion one level at a time.
It looks like you have, okay, you peel one layer and say, okay, the next layer is there,
etc.
But you go to the core, there may be nothing, right?
I mean, unlike apple, which has a core, onion maybe doesn't.
So the fact is we don't know whether there is such a universal set of rules.
But there are indications that there are, but if it is true, that would be a spectacular
discovery that would really have great consequence intellectually, utilitarian way and everything
else.
That would be why we would study.
Of course, we know if you understand it, we can save fuel on aircraft and make the jets
less noisy and all that.
We understand that too.
I think that's also very important.
But at the bottom, as a person interested in the physics of it, the mathematics of it,
that's really what drives us.
So we write papers on the universality of such and such and next paper we are not so
sure.
So I'm exaggerating a little bit, but that's how it is.
I wonder if you have more to say about the dimensions of beauty in relation to turbulence
in this topic.
So there was the relationship between turbulence and beauty was founded by Van Gogh somehow.
In the stairs nights, they found that the probability of difference between the luminosity
of two points in the paintings is the same of the probability of the difference of the
velocity of two points in the fluid flow of turbulence.
And this was, they found that it was mostly in the period where Van Gogh was mostly chaotic
in his mind when he was upset and almost crazy.
And while the period that was more relaxed, this characteristic of turbulent motion in
his paintings was not there.
We have a diagnosis for Van Gogh?
Maybe analysts don't like to apply diagnosis to people we haven't in example.
Especially in public.
All right.
Well, I think for me, at least in thinking about beauty and turbulence, it reminds me
of a study I recently read that across the globe, different painting, landscape paintings
were put in front of different types of people to see if there was some type of universal
beauty in landscape art.
And the consistent beautiful image that each culture had identified was a landscape that
had these following components in it.
So it had some view of the sky, some greenery, some trees, some type of path and some type
of moving water feature.
So this goes also to my other comment that I'm going to say that often spaces, this goes
back to my architecture, the pattern language.
You get anyone know about the pattern language?
It's kind of an architectural Bible that has different patterns you can put together
for designing a space.
For example, windows need to be on two sides of a room.
Those are the types of the rooms that people like to hang out in in different houses, et
cetera, talks about curb height, and they're kind of cute patterns, but also you can design
an entire community around them.
And my favorite one is that people are most happy when they're near moving water and flowing
water.
And this always makes me think about spaces that are successful like Pali Park here.
Anyone familiar with Pali Park?
It has a water feature or even in front of the Seagram Center, so all these kind of water
and moving water.
Even at the, we're not, this could be the lay person just looking at it, but it's about
being near water that has psychological and positive effects on humans.
That's why we all go.
Well, it also makes one wonder about the evolutionary significance of its potable moving water
as opposed to still water and as opposed to ocean water as potable and must have adaptive
meaning to, and that's kind of the, you know, you wonder about the connection between aesthetic
perception, right?
And making judgments about survival.
Right.
There's a really wonderful book that I think came out this past year called Blue Mind by
Wallace Nichols, and they have a conference about the psychology behind being near water
and the effects of water on the human.
It's a really wonderful book, but the author himself puts sensors on his body and jumps
in the water and swims for miles.
But they're more physiological sensors, so it's trying to figure out also how he feels.
And if anyone wants to check out that book, it's been a very, one of my favorites that
I've read in the past year.
What's the name again?
Blue Mind.
Could I make a remark on your comment?
Yes.
Maybe related, but if it is not, please excuse me.
So I grew up, I was brought up and grew up in an interior part of another continent.
And the first time I saw the ocean, I was probably 16 years old.
For me, what was most beautiful was the kind of environment in which I grew.
There were mountains and rocky mountains and not huge trees.
It never bothered me about that much.
So we, until I came away to, let's say, New England and something like that, I didn't
quite really have a great admiration for greenery, or blowing water, or anything like
that.
So my sense of what is interesting, what is so admirable somehow, changed.
It changed.
I mean, in fact, on some other matters, I had a certain sense of what constitutes beauty
in women.
I mean it with no disrespect at all.
But now, I mean a totally different environment for many years.
My concept of what beauty in women is has changed altogether.
If not altogether, I mean to a significant degree.
So in some sense, the question for all of you is whether all this is really not as deep
as evolution and things like that, but it is maybe more controlled by your environment.
How, how, if all I know is where I grew up, I don't know that I would appreciate some
of the same things that I do now.
So it may not be as deep as one thing, may not be wired in your evolutionary means.
So that's the question I had for you, actually.
Oh, well, this was just something I was observing and the results came back that these features
for me.
I'm more like you.
I grew up in midwest, so there's no ocean.
I like a big muddy river in rocks.
Yeah, rocks.
Yeah, I do like the rocks.
But there is something that's kind of, the ocean is more mystical or like it has a level
of mystique for me that is, that shifts between day and night even.
Because you look at the ocean at night, there's no color, so you just can see the forms,
especially on a night with a full moon.
You can really understand where the waves are coming from, how far they're coming,
and it's unbelievable to see the ocean at night.
But also, I would never go in the ocean.
Has anyone gone swimming in the ocean at night?
Way out.
That way out.
And this is scary.
Yeah, that's, it seems, there's fear in that.
Yeah.
At least for me, and that's what that piece is a little bit about.
Like big things we can't get.
I didn't see stars, like a full night sky star, so I was a teenager.
Because I grew up in cities with like so much light pollution, so I thought like stars
was like, oh, there's like four of them.
You know, and then I went and I had a, I took like a road trip, my sophomore year in college
or something like that to Vermont, and then the sunset, and I was like, wait a minute.
What?
You know, and that was like this really amazing, you know, thing where, you know, you see
something just that you thought was kind of manageable and simple, and it turns out to
be incredibly awe-inspiring and complex.
Gives you a little bit of perspective.
That was my like blue marble moment.
It was, it was backwards though.
But it was that like you thought you knew the planet, and then you definitely didn't
know the planet.
And I kind of got, yeah.
So when people do cross-cultural studies on aesthetics, one thing that comes out as a
universal is a preference for curves over angular angles.
That doesn't disprove it being cultural.
It may just be cultural commonalities.
Right.
Returning to turbulence for another minute or so.
So we all know that flow through a pipe is turbulent very often.
The jet exiting from an aircraft is turbulent.
The oceans are turbulent.
The air quite often moves in turbulent ways.
So there are two different views of looking at turbulence.
In a certain sense, what happens inside the pipe is quite different from what happens
inside the ocean because there is friction on the walls and pipes are of finite length
and all of this kind of stuff.
The oceans, although there are walls, they're so far away from the main activity that the
walls may not have any effect.
Therefore, one line of enquiry is to study each of these classes of turbulent flows on
their own merits.
So one becomes an expert in turbulence in pipe flows.
Another becomes an expert in turbulence in ocean, etc.
But there is a second part to which I made a lot of evolution earlier, which is to say
yeah, there are specific aspects that are in fact different from one flow to another.
But is there an essence of the turbulence, so to speak, that transcends each of these
real specific things and what is that?
And if it is true, is it a good model, even going more general, is it a good model for
studying the interaction among many components, a large number of components in some nonlinear
way, nonlinear way that you can sort of forget about the details of where you started.
So that's the line of enquiry.
But what I'm thinking about turbulence, how it's embodied by humans that are feeling it
upon themselves as an airplane when you're on an airplane or you kind of understand this
movement.
I think one journey through turbulence, through many different layers of turbulence, could
be the human experience or how it's impacting something that can be felt.
My brother is actually an aerospace engineer and his PhD was how turbulent flow goes over
the wings of jets and makes all these crazy models of it.
So for him, it's just about going and being in a wind machine and observing it.
And he actually has a little jet that I think runs off of algae fuel, just as a pet in his
garage.
But just kind of trying to understand this, the way he's looking at it as a model or
through computation or through air.
And we're fine with him.
He loves it.
Like when we're on an airplane, the skin tossed around in Colorado or whatever, like
flipping upside down.
He's like, this is awesome.
But I think that it's about that kind of, is there a way that there's an embodied experience?
Maybe not through human but other species or other like birds or other entities that are
living that are being impacted by this.
Each to himself or herself.
Yeah.
So, I think that's only in human mind at any given interval of time.
Zillion thoughts fly through, I'm saying it in not in any real rigorous way.
So many, many thoughts go by.
One thought does not continue in the next instant, etc.
So there is very poor correlation between what you think now and what you might think
next minute, especially for people who haven't concentrated down their mind too much.
See in turbulence too, something like that happens.
That is to say, there's only finite correlation between what happens here and what might happen
a little bit later.
So I have often wondered whether in fact there are models one can make, models mathematical
models that have finite correlation.
If you're a yogi for instance, you concentrate on one thing for hours and end and the same
thought, but most people are not.
Most people are just fleeting thoughts, enhanced by the complexity, enhanced by the environment
around oneself.
So it may be that there is some deeper model one can actually tell, I have wondered sometimes
between how the mind works and how let's say turbulent flow outside of the human's
work.
That might be very interesting and you are interested in mind and how it works and this
would be a very fruitful line of dialogue at least until we decide it is useless.
Do you have any speculation as to what some of the underlying connections are?
So of course there are special characteristics of the mind or the brain let's say, brain
and mind are two different entities I understand.
Presumably they are very strongly related even though they're separate.
So there is the spatial structure and then there is a temporal variations that take place
and somehow these are all connected to thoughts and one should be able to somehow connect
them and at least at a level of speculation it would be worth thinking about.
So there has been quite a bit of work on EEG with thoughts that are parallel to what
you are suggesting.
When we are asleep there is a very strong algorithm and then when the person is awake
you get less rhythmic behavior.
I don't know what kinds of correlation lengths you get before you can't predict.
I haven't done any EEG works I'm not sure.
Very interesting.
My son maps the brain and using FMRR machines.
And then he tries to understand the relation between patterns on the one hand and functionality
on the other.
I'm not even sure whether the ideas are very properly formulated.
Well, FMRRI isn't very good for this because it has a time constant of six seconds.
It's not directly measuring neural activity, it's measuring the blood response.
And so you don't really get temporal dynamics out of it.
The megamission.
So EEG and MEG both respond fine and they will be fine for looking at that.
Dare we delve into the quantum dimensions of turbulence in our discussion?
Yes.
Well, quantum turbulence is this turbulence that happens in superfluid which is liquid
helium at a temperature below 2.11 Kelvin and it has a macroscopic quantum order.
So there is quantum mechanical effects on large scale and you have these vertices that instead
of being all of different sizes like you have in a normal flow they are quantized.
So they are all the same and are all multiple of the quantum of circulation which are certain
quantity.
And they are again of atomic size like I was saying in width but macroscopic in length
and interact in different ways and if you've seen the videos of quantum words that they
are you've seen the wave emotions they have.
And it's very important for many reasons in the order of the dissipation of the energy
in the quantum turbulence.
And you have this mechanism which is called reconnection when two vertices get together.
They get together the exchange tails and then they separate and you probably have seen also
if you haven't you can look them later at this mechanism which is again central to the
mechanism of dissipation.
And dissipation is important because you wouldn't think that in a fluid which is completely
without friction you will have any dissipation.
But in fact you have also dissipation in a quantum fluid.
And so that is also one of the reasons you would like to study quantum turbulence to
see how dissipation compares between the classical and quantum flow.
Could I maybe add a little bit maybe just make it less technical than I and Rick on said.
But ordinary room temperature and pressure etc.
The fluids that we know air and water and others they do not have any quantum mechanical
properties or they do everything is quantum mechanics but it somehow gets smeared out
so it doesn't really matter.
So we are always looking at water and air and things like that where there are these
vertices but each vortex spins differently that is different the magnitude that you can
associate with those vertices will all be different they can be all over the map.
There is no restriction of any sort.
And so studying the interaction among them which is really one of the primary objects
of turbulent studies becomes a little bit more complicated because you have so many
dissimilar objects that are interacting with each other.
But it so happens that if you take a fluid that can remain in a liquid form even at very
low temperatures helium is the only one that remains a liquid if you go below about 2.7
Kelvin everything else freezes to become a solid.
But this one for whatever reason remains a liquid and then quantum mechanical effects
begin to show up somehow and this is what you are saying long range order and things
like that.
The manifestation of these emergence of quantum mechanics in fluids there one of the consequences
is that these vertices which in room temperature were all very dissimilar and things like that
they become really ordered the circulation around them that is says strength of these
vertices are all identical.
Therefore one thinks that somehow in studying the interaction of identical objects will
be much easier to understand and in fact if there is any element of truth to what I was
saying earlier that really interaction among elements is really what matters to understand
turbulence not so much what the objects themselves are.
Then the promises of the thought is that going to quantum mechanical temperatures lower temperatures
where quantum mechanical vertices become manifest it would be easier to understand and it would
be easier to simulate on a computer it would be therefore lead us to understand that is
really of interest to us which is turbulence around us and inside us as well.
And Enrico was so this quantum mechanical quantum vertices have been around us thoughts
for a long time fine one actually was the one who proposed the existence of this quantum
vertices and then there was some flurry of activity on this but nobody had seen these
vertices for a very long time.
So my graduate student Greg Buelly was the first one who actually observed these vertices
and Enrico actually followed him and he made many improvements on how to visualize them
and then also interaction among the vertices which is the part that he was talking about
earlier.
Well I think we are going to open it up to questions from the audience and you could
step up to the microphone and say your name.
Hi my name is William Grassy and I would like you to talk about fluid dynamic equations
and the different aspects of that.
So it is heat and viscosity and pressure and what is fluid there are four things in the
velocity.
So these are the equations that you are using to map out turbulence on an airplane wing
or whatever and they are nonlinear.
My question is really can we think of those four dimensions of fluid dynamics metaphorically
in the sense that these are the components of creating turbulence in gases and liquids.
Is there something, can we play with that metaphorically in thinking about art and the
creation of art?
That is the question.
So interesting question.
That is a good question.
You got Dana.
So thinking about just to repeat the question.
Can these equations for turbulence be metaphorically thought of as art or in art or?
It could be emotion or it could be.
That is a very good question.
If you could do it for economics and in the market it could get very rich.
Well there is an interesting art project in which some artists took the stock market
data and remapped it to a very believable mountain topography and they rendered it perfectly.
Michael Najar.
Yes.
So they spatialized the information and these equations in a certain way.
So I do think that there are opportunities to when these would spatialize the information
into some type of known representation so it could be landscapes or could be color or
could be many things.
So there is endless opportunities and I guess that is a problem with art because there is
hundreds and hundreds of ways to look at it.
But there is something that I think crosses over between the two and that might be showing
something that is invisible, bringing visibility to it.
So I think that is where the metaphor would start for me at least if I was to look at
this and I was to look at turbulent flow over an airplane and I can look at what my
brother is doing or I can look at these.
What I was excited about, I think what Enrico said about the tail switching.
Can you say something about tail switching?
I mean just thinking about that that is crazy and wild and this kind of uniformity that
happens below this temperature and helium that Trini is mentioning.
So there is so many ways to make this more visible in different ways.
But the interesting thing about the piece out there is you can actually see it and it
is a camera.
To take maybe a higher level of stab at your question like one of the things that I have
been working on a lot is problematizing this cultural moment that we live in where we sort
of live in the era of the quantified selfie.
We have all these tools around us, around instrumenting our lives.
I have got five things on me that are measuring me right now.
I have got my heart beat and how far I have walked.
I have got this thing with all my email, all this stuff.
And I think to Trini's point about these very simple interactions add up to things that
we can't predict.
And that is a metaphor for humanity and life and all this stuff is something that I think
artists have this lens on that is worth valorizing and preserving the idea that it is complicated.
I have a self-portrait that I made once where I took all of my email, so like about half
a million emails.
And so every email I sent in like 20 years or something like that.
And I took all the names everybody I have ever emailed with, stuck them in the middle
of a visualization.
And it is called a force directed graph.
I run a physics equation on it.
I blow them all up and give everybody gravity based on how long they have been emailing each
other, how much they have been emailing each other.
And then I would do sort of sentimental analysis on the name.
So if I say I love you, you are heavier to me.
And what happens is it ends up making this constellation of my life where there is this
main line complex and it is very messy.
Yeah, it looks like a big graph.
It looks like a big graph of everybody I ever talked to.
And I hand wrote all the names.
So it is not quite as digital as maybe I make it sound.
But like that thing of these very simple things adding up to things that are really
complex can be.
A little try to give you a higher answer.
I would like to give a lower answer.
Yeah, I mean, try anyhow.
So I will interpret your question the following way.
If you take a gas flow, gas has zillions of molecules.
Zillions is not a word, but still.
And so each molecule must have some effect on how the flow happens.
But it just so happens for most purposes, you don't need all these zillion things.
You only need as you said five variables, pressure, density, velocity, etc.
And so in general, when you are looking at very multidimensional phenomena, it may very
well be that there are only a small number of things that are of interest and importance
for us.
And that's what happens in fluids and that's what you said.
So the question now is whether in other human endeavors, there may be many influences that
are happening on a thought or an object or a person, but really how many of them are
important.
And if in fact this huge multidimensional space can somehow be reduced to a small number of
dimensions.
Certainly in financial market, every investor, how he or she gets into the market, will have
some influence on the behavior of the stock market.
But actually, maybe not all of them are important.
Maybe what happens to Apple may be much more important somehow.
And so if you know a small number of things, it's conceivable that you can get, that's
the purpose of S&P and all these business, that's what they do.
So you might ask therefore an artist when she works on something, whether the multitude
of influences that you think will influence production of an art, are they really important?
Are the multitude of thoughts that happen inside the brain, inside our own world?
Will all of them matter?
Probably in some way, every little thing will have some little effect.
But is it only that there are five or ten or whatever variables that really control what
happens?
It may be as you said, Luke, it may be the technology of the moment, it may be the cultural
background, it may be the political environment in which you live.
I don't know, I mean are you up-bringing or the tensions that you had when you were a
child?
Maybe there are only a small number of things like that.
And that would be interesting to explore.
Of course I don't know the answer, but I really like the question.
I simply elaborated my understanding of what you said.
I'm on painters, so I don't have as much background in science, but I felt that painting
or art was a little bit minimized here in its methodology.
And I've spoken before and probably have said some demon things like that word beauty has
to be reconsidered, how it's spoken about.
Because for the most part, when you read artist's writings, they don't say I'm working toward
beauty.
This is not what they say their motive is.
And so what then is the artist trying to do?
And there were some topics that came up that began to touch on it, like subjective and
objective.
The relationship of science to the subjective and objective.
The relationship of art is a little different.
Now science you mentioned has constraints, and I like that.
But so do the arts.
They have languages.
And languages change, they're complex, but they still have some constriction.
And so if you think about painting, for instance, they've dealt with these issues, but in a
very different way, space and time, for instance.
The futurists were very interested in the concept of time.
The cubists were interested in space.
And so within that framework, they try to devise a language.
Things are more complex today.
And art is really not the thing in itself.
It is a building block, just like sciences, toward a relationship between the self and
the outer world.
And to define how science says that is where the difference lies.
What is the relationship between a scientist and the outer world, the subjective and the
objective, and what is it in the artist?
And the artist is an individualist.
The scientist is too, but in a different way.
I mean, Cezanne said I'm just a link in the long chain of development of my spatial concepts,
my way of creating a landscape.
Oops.
Anyway, I just want to speak up a little bit for the arts, because it's a very complex
art.
Can you tell us what you tried to do as an artist?
Well, I can't.
People say, oh, East to me, are you realist or abstract?
And I find those questions ridiculous.
I am interested in states of mind.
And De Currico spoke about it, and he called it shtimmung.
And in Indian music, they have ragas and things.
But states of mind, I don't know, maybe it's more in the realm of study of the mind.
I don't know quite how in science you would deal with such a factor.
But I'm interested in states of mind and ways to, I consider myself a poet painter.
So I'm interested in words as equivalents in shapes and forms, the way a poet would be.
All right, that's fine.
But I do feel that there needs to be a lot more bridges today.
There were bridges in the Renaissance, but there needs to be a lot more bridges today
about the complexity of the problem.
And it can be discussed, but it's very difficult because we have to get a language set up for
that.
So I'm not sure what's going on today.
There are so many pictorial languages existing.
There are so many varieties of what art is today.
It's extended beyond the canvas into the space you live in.
I mean, it has ranged all over so we no longer can speak that there's only painting and someone
will be doing a performance and they'll say that's an artist.
So we have a lot of, it's a vast topic.
Now in science, I don't know if you have the equivalents.
It's the same, but it has spread so much that one part of the, one group of scientists can't
relate to the other group.
But once in a while something happens in science.
That is a concept arises and it will collapse a number of things which seem so disparate
in the beginning.
And now they are all sort of talking about the same.
In art, I don't know if that happens.
I totally agree with you what you said that it has become very much.
I think the idea of turbulence.
I think fixed form is a problem both in the visual world probably and in some way in the
sciences.
And I think artists are struggling with what, you know, form in forms in space and the
irrational elements and the unknown elements.
And there's a lot of, well it started really with abstract expression is to try and explore
the inner life and try and explore the inner life.
They got into a spatial realm that was also undefined in terms.
So I think the languages are, you know, what you just said, it's whether we'll find a universal
language.
I don't know if we want to.
I think the excitement in art is the X factor in which you don't know if you want to find
the answer to X but it's the journey that's important.
And I think artists are very involved with journey more than anything.
Yeah.
Thank you.
We would say the same too.
It's not being there but the process, the becoming, becoming instead of being there is
really the essence of science actually.
That's very much the contemporary world.
The journey and the, and yes, very much.
Thank you.
Thank you for your very interesting comment.
Hi.
So I teach English at high school level.
And so one of the things that teaching in terms of two courses I'm teaching, both pretty
much dealing with sort of like the idea of like what is art in terms of like something's
going to ask a question.
Isn't the job of both science and art to alert us to alert us and extend our understanding
of meaning?
And then thinking of meaning in terms of like what is the archetypal?
You know, that extends beyond time and space.
And then how does the archetypal extend to our current collective unconscious or the
current zeitgeist?
One of the things I was thinking about, like when you guys were talking about turbulence
and if you can speak more into this, isn't our understanding of sort of what is chaos
or what is turbulence or what is sort of even confusing?
Just sort of where we are at the moment, you know, and isn't that sort of understanding
of like, I was looking at my notes here.
The idea of like complexity of modernity, the same thing in the sense that like complexity
is, modernity is always moving and therefore complexity is always moving and therefore
like what we don't understand and what we come to understand is also always moving.
Any takers?
I'm not sure exactly what you were asking.
Are you saying actually?
So in chaos, what happens is you start with certain types of initial conditions that is
you know one is born in certain way, once color is that etc.
But all of them gets forgotten in a certain sharp period of time.
That's the essence of chaos that is initial conditions get forgotten and the evolution
really leads you so far away from where you started that it doesn't matter.
And then you have the complexity.
The complexity comes in by the interplay of this forgetting about initial conditions
and the relation to relation of that to the environment.
So I think we are talking about words roughly the same meaning although it's not entirely
obvious.
So now after that I last track of your thread and thread of your question.
So please repeat it for us.
I think we are talking about the sort of pursuit of understanding.
It seems like the forum is trying to deal with what is this sort of link between art and
science.
And it seems to me that sort of the sort of the pursuit of the sort of the artist is
to sort of capture the current moment.
Like the artist as an English teacher I teach that Mary Shelley is as a 16 year old sitting
down and capturing the industrial revolution through Frankenstein.
And you have all of these artists over the point who are sort of capturing our current
understanding but it's so complex.
And also like science kind of it seems to me that the scientist does that as well.
Like they only work to sort of like come from T.S. Eliot.
Like I can only work from the school of English that I built up to this point.
It seems the same for the science.
I think your question is so large that it might be something that you can also maybe
you know address after the.
Can I make a quick response?
So I think we would all agree that there is this challenge of anyone working in areas
which are trying to achieve understanding of healing for example with this very complex
world we're in.
And Professor Shrinivasan was pointing out some similarities between art and science.
So I would like to add to that some important differences between art and science.
And that one of them is the one concept of one truth.
This came up actually just before we met with Rob because he in psychoanalytics they allow
for multiple truths.
Some people laugh at that.
Thank you.
It's a defining quality of most of modern science that we only allow one truth.
And so a proposition is either right or wrong.
And we work very hard to show it's right.
Well actually people propose things and everyone tries to show they're wrong.
But in the process you've been often create new things that are slightly different that
will withstand all the attacks.
And that concept of having one truth I don't think really has a parallel in art.
And many people think that the ability of science to make progress, most of our modern
technology comes from that method of reasoning of thinking that the world is one way and
that we must prove things.
And so it's a very different way of thinking and working.
Thank you.
Is it one of the things for example when I teach post-modernism?
I talk about the fact that my senior essay question was sort of-
I'm sorry.
So one of the senior questions for this year was like charts the death of the progress
towards the death of the meta-narrative from the classic period to the post-modern period.
And so with post-modernity we had that sort of at this point questioning of this idea
of the ultimate truth, like the meta-narrative.
And it seems that with science, because we talked about the fact of the Copernican papers
which were published and then 200 years under the pope until finally released.
And even with science you had this sort of constant challenging of, you know, like with
Einstein challenging Newton and all these other things, right?
Thank you.
Yeah.
We can continue the discussion after I want to just leave time for other people to ask
questions anyone has.
Hello, I'm Bob Lang and I'm a psychoanalyst with the White Institute.
And I'd like to go back to the Euler formula which I had never seen before.
So you showed that, you said how beautiful it was.
It's very beautiful too.
I didn't understand the item with all of the exponents and so on.
But that plus one equals zero.
So it's an equation.
You take away one from the left side and take it away from the right side and you have the
exponents equal zero minus one.
Now mathematically of course you ignore the zero, but you can also pause and ask that
question, how can you take one away from nothing?
How can nothing have anything to take away from it, right?
And what this brought to mind in relation to the rest of the topic about turbulence and
how things change was the heart sutra in Buddhism which essentially is emptiness form.
Form is emptiness, a big paradox, right?
How can form be emptiness and emptiness form?
Well, you know, I think a related aspect of this is impermanence.
Everything is changing all the time.
That it's not just the breath forming that weird shape.
It's the clouds of our thoughts appearing and disappearing just like that.
It's our bodies going.
You know, it all depends really the dimension I think that was left out or not emphasized
so much as time.
You know, if you speed up the clock, everything's gone before you know it and you slow it down
and it seems like we're here, you know, with a certain degree of constancy.
But everything is affecting everything else.
There's the Brownian motion of every of the molecules in our ears.
Everything is disappearing while it's reappearing.
Creation, you know, it's like at the quantum level too.
Things are here and then they're gone and then, you know, are there gone and they're
not gone and they're here and they're here.
So I think there's something that's actually almost universal about chaos and the turbulence
of existence that gets touched on with this.
And I wonder actually if the emptiness is formed, form emptiness seems relevant to any
of you in this regard.
Yeah.
This duality is not only prevalent in Buddhism and Hinduism and things like that, but also
in physics.
If you take a photon, which is the source of light, is it a particle or is it a wave?
It's a particle sometimes, it's a wave sometimes.
So I think all of these things come because we are trying to describe nature which we
really don't understand that well.
And we have a certain language, we have a certain framework within which we have tried
to describe them and it's always inadequate, especially in the context you said, you know,
voice doesn't reach there, your eyesight doesn't reach there, you don't know what your, you,
I mean by you I don't mean you particularly.
We don't know really what reality is like.
We only have an image of reality and we construct that image through a language that we have,
we are aware of.
And this language is totally inadequate when you go very deep and I think the example you
gave is one of them in my opinion.
We just don't really know what the reality is.
Thank you.
That's a good place to be.
Any other questions?
This will be our last question.
I was listening to this conversation and I think like a little bit like the discussion
was down to human beings and art I believe are regulated by something that we call conscience.
So we are aware of ourself, what we say our thoughts even if we don't control them.
While in nature in physics we assume that like there is not a reading is more objective.
Yes, we are traditional image of science is more objective is not related to that subjectivity.
So what is the situation?
Are we looking at science as an objective science while in reality there is like a huge
subjective part or our thoughts, our processes are instead controlled by science and so doesn't
exist the conscience is just like our illusion.
Some of us work in brain science.
It gets murkier.
No, of course.
I was like not using the right term.
So part one can take situations in physics that seem very objective and black and white
and then you can get situations in physics that are become harder to describe and we
touched on some of those.
But you can go into biology and you can say okay we are going to use magnetic resonance
image and we are going to induce oscillations in the molecules and see what kind of radio
ways we get out and from that we will be able to draw a picture of the brain and then we
can see how brain activity modifies that and we get these patterns out we start making.
But actually if you are interested in understanding human experience you still have to talk to
the people and ask them what they felt.
So some people are very interested in finding what parts of the brain are most active when
we have the experience of beauty and there is some argument about that.
And so one can develop rigorous methods that we use to try and draw inferences about perception
based on subjective reports of participants.
So I do that every day in my lab.
And it is pretty rigorous.
Color vision is pretty well established now and we understand that color vision is the
three dimensional space.
And some people work on consciousness I happen not to.
But it is obviously an important phenomena in our lives.
But I am not sure that it really raises that much of a philosophical problem.
In my work environment it is a technical issue.
Consciousness gets slippery.
The first time you ask someone to ask you whether something is conscious it seems like
a clear question.
The tenth time it is asked it starts to seem like a weird philosophical question does
have a clear answer.
If I understand what you are saying related to my question it is like that individuality
doesn't exist because it happened at some point the number of molecules united in a
certain form and processes a certain number of electric steam away the generate heart.
What we call art.
And it is not related to any subjective unique essence of that human being.
I am not sure that follows.
If you take similar constituent elements but they interact in different ways you will get
a different outcome.
The best may be the same but you will get a different outcome.
The essence of the question you asked it seems to me was you are saying in science there
is a clear distinction between the observer and the observed.
Where is in art that is not.
In fact it is the mixture of the two that makes it all the same.
But your answer quite rightly was you know what at one time seemed very subjective can
in fact be formulated now in a more objective where what appears to be more augutive.
There are still some issues that you cannot tackle but maybe we will make more progress
and so the real answer is maybe there is this distinction maybe that is because we don't
understand it well enough maybe you are right who knows I don't know the answer but I think
we are making progress in trying to link the two.
That is how I see it anyhow.
As an artist I have kind of worked through kind of oscillating between objective, subjective
my own conscious experience.
So for example I have this one piece that is about an earthquake.
I was in the Tohoku earthquake in Japan and I felt it with my body.
I wanted to make a work about it because it was an experience that was unforgettable and
it was very personal.
My first instinct was go find the data in Shinjuku where I was find the sensor and try
to look at that data in a bunch of different ways to understand the movement again.
So I probably made like 20 to 30 experiments in different software, animating cameras,
animating particles, taking the XYZ data, looking at it just as a typical seismic reading
and I finally realized that it was movement over time so I was able to generate a curve,
like a really dense curve and almost looked like at the molecular level like a bomb.
It was terrifying to look at but it still was distilled and it was still the data that
was ruling.
So I needed to rip that back into a subjective experience again even though the data was
objective at this point it had been removed.
I brought it back and I did a gestural painting of what I saw in the data so it was like this
kind of oscillation between, so that's something I'm dealing with all the time is someone making
work trying to solve that and I don't think ever will but it's a really enjoyable space
to work through this kind of oscillation between subjective, objective, personal, looking at
something at the way a machine would look at it but that can never replace what it felt
like.
Well on that note we'll have to leave things with some, the beauty of some of these uncertainties
which make them perhaps all the more beautiful.
I want to ask you to join me in thanking our participants.
Thank you Luke, Dana, extremely.
Dennis and especially Enrico who spearheaded the organization of this event and thank you
so much.
Thank you for hosting us.
Thank you.